hey I'm according this early in the
morning before I get on a train that is
going to take me far far away another 14
hour long train ride from one end of
Europe to the other but I thought I
would make a comment on a knot of
political issues that I've seen
reflected on especially amongst vegans
lightly because vegans have become
sensitized to the whole question of
water scarcity and the sense in which
meat agriculture the production of meat
impacts the water available for other
purposes now it has always been the case
it has been the case since the invention
of photography that people have had
their emotions stirred by seeing of the
human beings suffering due to lack of
water there have always been within my
lifetime stirring images of people
around the world whether in Africa or
otherwise afflicted by lack of access to
water and now these are sort of backed
up with statistics that are interesting
but misleading about how many millions
of people lack access to water often
presented adjacent to a sentence telling
you that so many people struggle to
carry water as a burden for so many
hours per day over so many kilometers
per day and so on water scarcity is
actually a completely different issue
from lack of access to potable drinking
water potable just mean safe to drink
now safe to drink immediately
this seems like a simple issue for
charities to get involved in for human
people with humanitarian ceased to get
involved in for vegans involvement and
it's not like most things in development
economics it's profoundly technical and
its technical terms of Social Sciences
its technical in terms of geology and
the Natural Sciences its technical in
terms of the technology you're going to
use to get the water to people and the
political barriers concerns and
considerations are also very technical
many of the things i see vegans saying
about this issue seems to presume that
water is a globally transferable
resource and it's not the fact that
there is a water shortage in California
does not mean that you can improve that
water shortage by using less water in
Alaska and actually Alaska and
California are quite close together I
mention Alaska for the reason that it
has been repeatedly proposed by both
private companies and by the government
in Alaska that they start sending boats
oil tankers large boats full of water
from Alaska to California that's been
proposed several times and every time it
gets proposed somebody with a degree in
economics gets out their calculator and
their pencil and does some kind of
feasibility study or sketch and says
look guys it's not happening it's never
going to work it's never economically
going to make sense to pump water out of
Alaska onto a boat and send to
California even though water is indeed
abundant in Alaska and it is indeed
scarce in California now which I would
even broader gaps between ecological
niches shall we say if you live in New
York City using less drinking water is
not going to help people in Africa in
any way the message of this video is not
as simple as that the difference between
water scarcity and lack of access to
potable water
lack of access to foot of water is for
example a problem in Brazil it's a
problem in Laos and Cambodia where I
lived but all three of those countries
are basically drowning in rain loss of
Cambodia have plenty of rivers and
swamps and lakes and everything else the
problem with making that drinking water
potable drink safe to drink is mostly
overcome by boiling water you could also
have a filtration plants you can do all
kinds of things to make water safe to
drink but again to imagine that when
you're looking at a raw statistic for
how many millions of people lack access
to boiling water well the problem there
is not people millions of people in the
middle of a desert who have to walk many
kilometres to get a bucket of water and
bring it back again and it's very
misleading to think of it in those ways
now what are the solutions as I've just
mentioned the solution is not filling up
a boat with water in Alaska and even
carrying it as far as California which
is quite close much less could it be
filling up a boat with water in Alaska
and moving it to Africa or Cambodia or
anywhere else these are problems that
have the solutions in reliance
predominantly on local government I
remember reading a study that was
claiming Brazil could solve its potable
water problems one hundred percent
through decentralized collection of
rainwater and then passing that
rainwater through a very simple filter
the collection of rainwater was cheap
technology it's why I use the word
decentralized you can set up little
tanks here and there made out of
concrete basically you just collect
rainwater into a tank pump it through a
filter than people to take showers and
and so on now i do not know that
reporting claiming a hundred percent
that may be exaggerating at someone but
obviously a very large percentage of the
water needs drink drinking water needs
fresh water needs for countries like
Brazil could be provided through
collecting drinking water and
you know there are hard limits to
international intervention I used to
live and work in Laos and Southeast Asia
international intervention can solve
problems it can also create problems
terrible long lasting problems we had
christian charities coming into laos and
digging wells so these are called deep
wells it's basically you take a metal
pipe and drive into the earth and start
pumping up water now I know the charity
I'm not going to need it's a crisp it's
a it's an American religious charity
then I'm thinking of in particular I
assume this charity was doing this
partly just out of habit because they
had past experience doing charity work
in Africa other places where water
scarcity is a big deal why they thought
these wells were needed it was a problem
to begin with the second problem was the
water these del with hurt me the water
these wells started pumping up was
actually poisoned with arsenic so you
get people of good faith people who are
true believers thinking they're doing
something positive and in fact they're
doing something as terrible long-term
consequences one of the reasons to leave
these projects in the hands of local
people in the government is precisely so
that there is local responsibility for
these projects whether that's just a
bunch of concrete tanks that collect
rainwater or it's digging up wells or
it's more grandiose plans for them
putting a dam on a river pumping water
out of aquifers one of the problems
international intervention is people buy
an airplane ticket they fly in and then
they buy another airplane ticket and
they fly out and there is no long-term
engagement with responsibility for the
issues and water is on the list of
tremendously long term issues and it is
on the list of things that local
governments need to be able to take care
of themselves they need to have the
capacity to take responsible
for that how does this whole thing
relate back to begin zhem well vegans
tend to be highly ethically motivated
people and I understand that they look
at a photograph of someone in Africa who
apparently lacks access drinking water
and they want to try to sell veganism as
if by you eating more bananas and less
meat you're going to help these people
in Africa and the example could be from
Latin America or Asia happens the photos
I've seen lately America and that is not
true it to me it's not even appealing
illusion or myth it's misleading in many
ways in terms of the continent of Africa
what you really need to look at is
population growth Africa has just
undergone a period of doubling its
population as a continent and whether
you want to save them congratulations or
not whether you see that as a crisis or
bringing impending doom or not the
reality is that whatever infrastructure
they had before whatever sources dream
more than four are now taxed in a way
they were not previously the
distribution of human population around
the globe has always been attached to
rivers and streams and lakes human
beings as a species have always
developed in close connection to sources
of drinking water and even within the
comment of Africa that's true you look
at where the deserts are and you look at
the number of people per square
kilometer always has been true but it's
always going to be true and although
africa's population has increased
dramatically also now the rate of
urbanization is increasing dramatically
so people are moving from the
countryside possibly from savannah areas
from deserts and arid countries and
areas they're moving to cities and those
cities are inevitably positioned on
lakes rivers and other source
the drinking water so there were a lot
of different dynamics at play and it's
exactly the sort of not of political and
ecological issues that you really do not
want outside amateurs getting involved
in just like those Christian
missionaries I mention Laos is easy to
have your heart in the right place and
to do the wrong thing for the right
reasons